Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov

A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A lock (A locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Menu

Search

Search

Environmental Topics

Environmental Topics

Air

Bed Bugs

Chemicals, Toxics, and Pesticide

Emergency Response

Environmental Information by Location

Health

Land, Waste, and Cleanup

Lead

Mold

Radon

Research

Science Topics

Water Topics

A-Z Topic Index

Laws & Regulations

Laws & Regulations

By Business Sector

By Topic

Compliance

Enforcement

Guidance

Laws and Executive Orders

Regulations

Report a Violation

Report a Violation

Environmental Violations

Fraud, Waste or Abuse

About EPA

About EPA

Our Mission and What We Do

Headquarters Offices

Regional Offices

Labs and Research Centers

Planning, Budget, and Results

Organization Chart

EPA History

Breadcrumb

Home

Lead

Learn About Lead

Información relacionado en español.

Lead is a toxic metal that is harmful if inhaled or swallowed and can pose serious health risks. This is particularly important for young children and pregnant women. Although most children in the U.S. have low levels of lead in their blood, some situations can increase their exposure and their blood lead levels.

This webpage provides practical information to help you identify potential sources of lead exposure, understand the health impacts of lead and learn how you can reduce your risk.

What is Lead?

Lead is a naturally occurring blue-gray metal found in small amounts in the earth’s crust. Most lead that people are exposed to comes from human activities, such as the historical use of leaded gasoline, release of lead from industrial facilities and lead-based paint in older homes and buildings, including childcare facilities and schools. Lead is mined then processed for use in products to make them durable and longer lasting. Once lead is used in a product, it is typically invisible to the naked eye. Lead lingers in the environment and does not break down or disappear from the environment over time.

Where is Lead Found?

Lead can be found in all parts of our environment - in the air, soil, water, food and in older buildings. Lead can get into the environment from things people used in the past and some things we still use today. You can be exposed to lead without knowing it. Exposure means lead gets into your body, usually when you breathe it in or swallow it. Your chance of exposure depends on where the lead comes from.

Federal and state laws limit lead in products like paint, water pipes and gasoline, so we are exposed to less lead. But lead can still pose health risks, especially for young children who put their hands and objects in their mouths. Find more information about sources of lead exposure and preventative actions to protect your family.

Who Is at Risk? What Are the Health Effects of Lead?

Lead is toxic to humans and animals, and there is no safe safe level of lead in children that has been identified. Lead can harm almost every organ and system in your body. Taking simple steps to reduce your family’s lead exposure is beneficial and can improve life outcomes.

Information About Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention

Learn more from CDC about childhood lead poisoning prevention.

Download the Prevent Childhood Lead Poisoning infographic.

Children Are Most Vulnerable

Lead is especially dangerous to children six years old and younger. Their growing bodies absorb more lead than adults, and their brains and nervous systems are more sensitive to the effects of lead.

Babies and young children may have higher exposure because they often put their hands, toys and other objects, which can have lead dust or soil on them, into their mouths.

In children, exposure to lead can cause:

Anemia

Damage to the brain and nervous system

Decreased ability to pay attention

Hearing and speech problems

Hyperactivity

Learning and behavioral problems

Lower IQ

Slowed growth and developmental effects

Underperformance in school

In rare cases, lead ingestion can cause seizures, coma and even death.

Adults (Including Pregnant Women) Can Be Exposed

Certain jobs and hobbies may increase your and your family’s risk of lead exposure. Jobs such as renovation, repair or painting of older homes, construction, furniture refinishing, smelting, mining, auto repair, working with leaded gasoline, and/or working at hazardous waste sites can expose you to lead. Hobbies such as making stained glass, fishing, or shooting and reloading lead ammunition can also expose you to lead.

Lead is harmful to all adults. In adults, lead exposure can cause:

Decreased kidney function

Heart-related problems and increased blood pressure

Infertility in both men and women

Learning, memory, and concentration problems

Weakness in fingers, wrists, and ankles

If a pregnant woman is exposed to lead, it can impact her developing fetus. Lead can build up in the body over time and is stored in bones along with calcium. During pregnancy and breastfeeding, lead can be released from the mother's bones along with calcium and pass to the fetus or infant. This can cause serious effects to the developing fetus or infant, including:

Causing the baby to be born too early or too small

Harming a developing fetus

Increasing the risk of miscarriage, stillbirth, and infertility

Find resources and more information about the health effects of lead for pregnant and lactating women.

What is Lead Poisoning?

Lead poisoning, or lead toxicity, as defined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), refers to lead exposures that cause illness and require immediate medical attention. It describes cases in which there are severe health effects due to high blood lead levels. If blood lead levels are 45 micrograms per deciliter (?g/dL) or higher, healthcare providers may recommend medication to help remove lead from the body. However, children are highly sensitive to lead and exposure at lower levels has been shown to cause harm.

In very rare cases, adults and children with very high lead levels may experience seizures, unconsciousness and death. Some symptoms of lead poisoning like headaches, stomachaches, nausea, tiredness and irritability are also symptoms of flu and other viruses.

Lower Your Chances of Lead Exposure

The most important step you can take is to prevent lead exposure before it happens. Simple actions like keeping your home clean and well-maintained go a long way in preventing lead exposure. You can lower the chances of exposure to lead in your home, both now and in the future, by taking action now to protect your family.

Lead Poisoning & Your Children

Learn how to protect children from lead exposure and lead poisoning, such as getting children a blood lead test and reducing exposure from lead-based paint, dust, drinking water and soil.

Lead Poisoning & Your Children is available in 14 languages.

Clean your home weekly using a clean, wet or damp cloth, sponge or mop to minimize dust, which may contain lead.

Eat a well-balanced diet with foods high in calcium, iron, zinc and vitamin C. These nutrients may help reduce the amount of lead absorbed by the body.

Wash children’s hands several times a day with soap and water, especially after playing outside or with animals.

Remove your shoes when entering your home to prevent tracking in lead from soil or worksites. In some cases, changing your clothes at work and washing your clothes before coming into contact with family members can provide added protection, depending on the amount of lead you are exposed to at work or through hobbies.

Routinely wash any items your children use regularly — especially those they put in their mouths, such as pacifiers, bottles, or stuffed animals and other toys — to minimize exposure to dust, which may contain lead.

Use only cold water for drinking, cooking and making baby formula. Using warm or hot water can cause more lead to enter the water from pipes and fixtures. Boiling water does not remove lead from water. Using a filter properly can also reduce lead in drinking water.

These are just a few actions and are not intended to be exhaustive, or to imply that all actions equally reduce lead exposure. If you are exposed to lead, it is important to understand where the lead is coming from to most effectively reduce risk.

Learn more about potential sources of lead exposure.

Find more actions you can take to protect your family from lead exposure.

Determine if your family is at risk for lead poisoning with the Lead Poisoning Home Checklist (PDF).

What Should I Do If I Think My Child or I Have Been Exposed to Lead?

Acting now can result in better health outcomes. If you have young children, find out if they've been exposed to lead and learn how to prevent and reduce further exposure.

Get a Blood Lead Test

Blood lead testing can tell you if you have been exposed to lead. The CDC recommends that children be tested at 12 and 24 months old. You can get the test at your healthcare provider's office or a lab. The test will tell you how much lead is in your child's blood, which is is called a blood lead level (BLL). A BLL at or above 3.5 µg/dL (CDC’s blood lead reference value) means your child has more lead in their blood than most children. Learn more about testing for lead poisoning in children from the CDC. For information about the CDC’s blood lead reference value, please visit CDC Updates Blood Lead Reference Value.

If your child has a high BLL, work with your doctor and local health officials to find the source and prevent further exposure. Learn more about recommended actions based on blood lead level from the CDC.

Reduce Exposure