Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov

A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A lock (A locked padlock) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Menu

Search

Search

Environmental Topics

Environmental Topics

Air

Bed Bugs

Chemicals, Toxics, and Pesticide

Emergency Response

Environmental Information by Location

Health

Land, Waste, and Cleanup

Lead

Mold

Radon

Research

Science Topics

Water Topics

A-Z Topic Index

Laws & Regulations

Laws & Regulations

By Business Sector

By Topic

Compliance

Enforcement

Guidance

Laws and Executive Orders

Regulations

Report a Violation

Report a Violation

Environmental Violations

Fraud, Waste or Abuse

About EPA

About EPA

Our Mission and What We Do

Headquarters Offices

Regional Offices

Labs and Research Centers

Planning, Budget, and Results

Organization Chart

EPA History

Breadcrumb

Home

Radon

Radon Risks and Solutions

Health Risk of Radon

"Do you know about radon?"

Dr. Bill Field at the University of Iowa and the Iowa Cancer Consortium have prepared "Breathing Easier" to help educate physicians on the dangers of radon and the link between the radioactive gas and lung cancer. Watch the videos!

Charles Lynch, M.D., medical director of the Iowa Cancer Registry, hosts the video and asks other physicians the simple question: "Do you know about radon?" Dr. Lynch stresses physicians' vital role in delivering information on radon to their patients.

See also:

Radon Media Campaigns

Basic Radon Facts

A Guide for Health Care Providers - Reducing the Risk From Radon: Information and Interventions

Cómo reducir el riesgo de radón: Información e intervenciones

This publication was supported in part by grant number XA-83576001 from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

Learn More About Lung Cancer

The following sources provide a wide range of good information about lung cancer, prevention, and treatment.

American Cancer Society

American Lung Association

National Cancer Institute; Radon and Cancer - National Cancer Institute Fact Sheet

Memorial Sloan-Kettering

Web MD - Slideshow: A Visual Guide to Lung Cancer

On this page:

Exposure to radon causes lung cancer in non-smokers and smokers alike

Radon risk if you smoke

Radon risk if you have never smoked

Studies find direct evidence linking radon in homes to lung cancer

Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation (BEIR) VI Report: "The Health Effects of Exposure to Indoor Radon"

2003 EPA Assessment of Risks from Radon in Homes

The Former U.S. Surgeon General issues national health advisory on radon

World Health Organization's international radon project

Radon-related lung cancer deaths compared to other select cancers

Webinar: An Introduction to Radon Gas in Homes

Exposure to Radon Causes Lung Cancer In Non-smokers and Smokers Alike

The Facts...

Lung cancer kills thousands of Americans every year. Smoking, radon, and secondhand smoke are the leading causes of lung cancer. Although lung cancer can be treated, the survival rate is one of the lowest for those with cancer. From the time of diagnosis, between 11 and 15 percent of those afflicted will live beyond five years, depending upon demographic factors. In many cases lung cancer can be prevented.

Smoking is the leading cause of lung cancer. Smoking causes an estimated 160,000* cancer deaths in the U.S. every year (American Cancer Society, 2004). And the rate among women is rising. On January 11, 1964, Dr. Luther L. Terry, then U.S. Surgeon General, issued the first warning on the link between smoking and lung cancer. Lung cancer now surpasses breast cancer as the number one cause of death among women. A smoker who is also exposed to radon has a much higher risk of lung cancer.

Radon is the number one cause of lung cancer among non-smokers, according to EPA estimates. Overall, radon is the second leading cause of lung cancer. Radon is responsible for about 21,000 lung cancer deaths every year. About 2,900 of these deaths occur among people who have never smoked. On January 13, 2005, Dr. Richard H. Carmona, the U.S. Surgeon General, issued a national health advisory on radon.

World Health Organization's international radon project

Secondhand smoke is the third leading cause of lung cancer and responsible for an estimated 3,000 lung cancer deaths every year. Smoking affects non-smokers by exposing them to secondhand smoke. Exposure to secondhand smoke can have serious consequences for children’s health, including asthma attacks, affecting the respiratory tract (bronchitis, pneumonia), and may cause ear infections.

For smokers the risk of lung cancer is significant due to the synergistic effects of radon and smoking. For this population about 62 people in a 1,000 will die of lung-cancer, compared to 7.3 people in a 1,000 for never smokers. Put another way, a person who never smoked (never smoker) who is exposed to 1.3 pCi/L (50 Bq/m3)has a 2 in 1,000 chance of lung cancer; while a smoker has a 20 in 1,000 chance of dying from lung cancer.

Learn more about Secondhand Smoke.

Radon Risk If You Smoke

from "A Citizen's Guide to Radon: The Guide to Protecting Yourself and Your Family From Radon" (PDF)

Radon LevelIf 1,000 people who smoked were exposed to this level over a lifetime*...The risk of cancer from radon exposure compares to**...WHAT TO DO:
Stop smoking and...

20 pCi/L (740 Bq/m3)About 260 people could get lung cancer250 times the risk of drowningFix your home

10 pCi/L (370 Bq/m3)About 150 people could get lung cancer200 times the risk of dying in a home fireFix your home

8 pCi/L (300 Bq/m3)About 120 people could get lung cancer30 times the risk of dying in a fallFix your home

4 pCi/L (150 Bq/m3)About 62 people could get lung cancer5 times the risk of dying in a car crashFix your home

2 pCi/L(75 Bq/m3)About 32 people could get lung cancer6 times the risk of dying from poisonConsider fixing between 2 and 4 pCi/L (75-150 Bq/m3)

1.3 pCi/L (50 Bq/m3)About 20 people could get lung cancer(Average indoor radon level)(Reducing radon
levels below 2 pCi/L (75 Bq/m3) is difficult.)

0.4 pCi/L (15 Bq/m3)About 3 people could get lung cancer(Average outdoor radon level)

Note: If you are a former smoker, your risk may be lower.
* Lifetime risk of lung cancer deaths from EPA Assessment of Risks from Radon in Homes (EPA 402-R-03-003).
** Comparison data calculated using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's 1999-2001 National Center for Injury Prevention and Control Reports.

Radon Risk If You Have Never Smoked

Radon LevelIf 1,000 people who never smoked were exposed to this level over a lifetime*...The risk of cancer from radon exposure compares to**...WHAT TO DO:

20 pCi/L (740 Bq/m3)About 36 people could get lung cancer35 times the risk of drowningFix your home

10 pCi/L (370 Bq/m3)About 18 people could get lung cancer20 times the risk of dying in a home fireFix your home

8 pCi/L (300 Bq/m3)About 15 people could get lung cancer4 times the risk of dying in a fallFix your home

4 pCi/L (150 Bq/m3)About 7 people could get lung cancerThe risk of dying in a car crashFix your home

2 pCi/L (75 Bq/m3)About 4 person could get lung cancerThe risk of dying from poisonConsider fixing between 2 and 4 pCi/L (75-150 Bq/m3)

1.3 pCi/L (50 Bq/m3)About 2 people could get lung cancer(Average indoor radon level)(Reducing radon levels below
2 pCi/L (75 Bq/m3) is difficult.)

0.4 pCi/L (15 Bq/m3) (Average outdoor radon level)

Note: If you are a former smoker, your risk may be higher.
* Lifetime risk of lung cancer deaths from EPA Assessment of Risks from Radon in Homes (EPA 402-R-03-003).
** Comparison data calculated using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's 1999-2001 National Center for Injury Prevention and Control Reports.

Studies Find Direct Evidence Linking Radon in Homes to Lung Cancer

(2005) Two studies show definitive evidence of an association between residential radon exposure and lung cancer. Two studies, a North American study and a European study, both combined data from several previous residential studies. These two studies go a step beyond earlier findings. They confirm the radon health risks predicted by occupational studies of underground miners who breathed radon for a period of years.

Early in the debate about radon-related risks, some researchers questioned whether occupational studies could be used to calculate risks from exposure to radon in the home environment. “These findings effectively end any doubts about the risks to Americans of having radon in their homes,” said Tom Kelly, Former Director of EPA’s Indoor Environments Division. “We know that radon is a carcinogen. This research confirms that breathing low levels of radon can lead to lung cancer.”

Read the "Iowa Radon Lung Cancer Study" by Dr. William Field on radon-related lung cancer in women.

Read the "Radon in Homes and Risk of Lung Cancer: Collaborative Analysis of Individual Data from 13 European case-control studies" by Dr. David Hill.

Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation (BEIR) VI Report: "The Health Effects of Exposure to Indoor Radon"

The National Research Council published the report, entitled: "Health Effects of Exposure to Radon: BEIR VI, Committee on Health Risks of Exposure to Radon (BEIR VI)". This report by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) is the most definitive accumulation of scientific data on indoor radon. The report confirms that radon is the second leading cause of lung cancer in the U.S. and that it is a serious public health problem. The study fully supports EPA estimates that radon causes about 15,000 lung cancer deaths per year.