Skip to main content

Skip to FDA Search

Skip to in this section menu

Skip to footer links

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

The .gov means it’s official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site.

The site is secure.
The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.

Search

Menu

Search FDA

Submit search

Featured

Report a Product Problem

Contact FDA

FDA Guidance Documents

Recalls, Market Withdrawals and Safety Alerts

Press Announcements

Warning Letters

Advisory Committees

En Español

Products

Food

Drugs

Medical Devices

Radiation-Emitting Products

Vaccines, Blood, and Biologics

Animal and Veterinary

Cosmetics

Tobacco Products

Topics

About FDA

Combination Products

Regulatory Information

Safety

Emergency Preparedness

International Programs

News and Events

Training and Continuing Education

Inspections and Compliance

Science and Research

Information For

Consumers

Patients

Industry

Health Professionals

Federal, State and Local Officials

Home

Food

Nutrition, Food Labeling, and Critical Foods

Food Allergies

Nutrition, Food Labeling, and Critical Foods

In this section

Food Allergies

Food Allergies

Food Allergies

Image

What’s New

On February, 18-20 2026, the FDA held the Virtual Public Meeting and Listening Session on Food Allergen Thresholds and Their Potential Applications

On January 6, 2025, the FDA announced the availability of:

Final Guidance for Industry: Questions and Answers Regarding Food Allergens, Including the Food Allergen Labeling Requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (Edition 5). This final guidance will replace both the draft and final guidance documents on food allergen labeling that were issued in November 2022. The new guidance has been updated based on comments submitted to the draft guidance and consists of questions and answers about food allergen labeling requirements, including the labeling of tree nuts, sesame, milk, eggs, incidental additives, highly refined oils, dietary supplement products, and certain specific packing and labeling situations, such as individual units within a multiunit package.

Final Guidance for FDA Staff and Interested Parties: Evaluating the Public Health Importance of Food Allergens Other Than the Major Food Allergens Listed in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. The final guidance outlines the approach the FDA generally intends to take when evaluating the public health importance of food allergens that are not one of the nine major food allergens identified by law in the U.S. The major food allergens are milk, eggs, fish, Crustacean shellfish, tree nuts, peanuts, wheat, soybeans, and sesame.

Food allergies and other types of food hypersensitivities affect millions of Americans and their families. Food allergies occur when the body's immune system reacts to certain proteins in food. Food allergic reactions vary in severity from mild symptoms involving hives and lip swelling to severe, life-threatening symptoms, often called anaphylaxis, that may involve fatal respiratory problems and shock. While promising prevention and therapeutic strategies are being developed, food allergies currently cannot be cured. Early recognition and learning how to manage food allergies, including which foods to avoid, are important measures to prevent serious health consequences.

To protect those with food allergies and other food hypersensitivities, the FDA enforces regulations requiring companies to list ingredients on packaged foods and beverages. For certain foods or substances that cause allergies or other hypersensitivity reactions, there are more specific labeling requirements.

The FDA provides guidance to the food industry, consumers, and other stakeholders on best ways to assess and manage allergen hazards in food. The FDA also conducts inspections and sampling to check that major food allergens are properly labeled on products and to determine whether food facilities implement controls to prevent allergen cross-contact (the inadvertent introduction of a major food allergen into a product) and labeling controls to prevent undeclared allergens during manufacturing and packaging. When problems are found, the FDA works with firms to recall products and provide public notification to immediately alert consumers. In addition, the FDA has the authority to seize and remove violative products from the marketplace or refuse entry of imported products.

Major Food Allergens

Congress passed the Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act of 2004 (FALCPA). This law identified eight foods as major food allergens: milk, eggs, fish, Crustacean shellfish, tree nuts, peanuts, wheat, and soybeans.

On April 23, 2021, the Food Allergy Safety, Treatment, Education, and Research (FASTER) Act was signed into law, declaring sesame as the 9th major food allergen recognized by the United States. The change was effective on January 1, 2023. All FDA requirements applicable to major food allergens, including labeling and manufacturing requirements, apply to sesame as of January 1, 2023. Products already in interstate commerce—for example, products that are on retail shelves, before January 1, 2023—do not need to be removed from the marketplace or relabeled. So, consumers should be aware that some products may not carry allergen labeling for sesame right away. During the transition period, the FDA recommends consumers check with the manufacturer or distributor identified on the food product if not sure whether a food product contains, or potentially contains, sesame, Watch our video for more information about the FASTER Act. The video includes basic information about the FASTER Act and helps answer frequently asked questions the FDA has received from the food industry and other stakeholders.

At the time of FALCPA’s passage, the eight major allergens accounted for 90 percent of food allergies and serious allergic reactions in the U.S. FALCPA requires that foods or ingredients that contain a "major food allergen" be specifically labeled with the name of the allergen source. Congress passed this law to make it easier for consumers who are allergic to foods and their caregivers to identify and avoid foods that contain major food allergens. The FDA enforces the provisions of this law in most packaged food products. This includes dietary supplements but does not include meat, poultry, and egg products (which are regulated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture); alcoholic beverages subject to Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau labeling regulations; raw agricultural commodities; highly refined oils; drugs; cosmetics; and most foods sold at retail or food service establishments that are not pre-packaged with a label.

At this time, the FDA has not established a threshold level for any allergens. A threshold is a value below which it is unlikely that a food allergic individual would experience an adverse effect.

Food Labels and Allergens

People with food allergies should read labels and avoid the foods they are allergic to. The law requires that food labels identify the food source of all major food allergens used to make the food. This requirement is met if the common or usual name of an ingredient already identifies that allergen's food source name (for example, buttermilk). The law also requires that the type of tree nut (for example, almonds, pecans, walnuts), and the species of fish (for example, bass, flounder, cod) and Crustacean shellfish (for example, crab, lobster, shrimp) to be declared.  The allergen's food source must be declared at least once on the food label in one of two ways.

The name of the food source of a major food allergen must appear:

In parentheses following the name of the ingredient.
Examples: “lecithin (soy),” “flour (wheat),” and “whey (milk)”

— OR —

Immediately after or next to the list of ingredients in a “contains” statement.
Example: “Contains wheat, milk, and soy.”

FALCPA's labeling requirements extend to retail and food-service establishments that package, label, and offer products for human consumption. However, FALCPA's labeling requirements do not apply to foods that are placed in a wrapper or container (such as paper or a box for a sandwich) following a customer’s order at the point of purchase.

Consumers may also see advisory statements such as “may contain [allergen] or “produced in a facility that also uses [allergen].” Such statements are not required by law and can be used to address unavoidable “cross-contact,” only if manufacturers have incorporated good manufacturing processes in their facility and have taken every precaution to avoid cross-contact that can occur when multiple foods with different allergen profiles are produced in the same facility using shared equipment or on the same production line, as the result of ineffective cleaning, or from the generation of dust or aerosols containing an allergen.

FDA guidance and regulations for the food industry states that advisory statements should not be used as a substitute for adhering to current good manufacturing practices and must be truthful and not misleading.

Frequently Asked Questions: Food Allergen Labeling Guidance for Industry

For questions and answers regarding the updates to the latest guidance, visit Frequently Asked Questions: Food Allergen Labeling Guidance for Industry.

Other Allergens or Allergenic Substances