[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 244 (Tuesday, December 23, 2025)]
[Notices]
[Pages 60096-60099]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]
[FR Doc No: 2025-23712]




FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

[Docket No. OP-1877]

Request for Information and Comment on Reserve Bank Payment
Account Prototype

AGENCY: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

ACTION: Request for information and comment.



SUMMARY: The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board)
seeks public input on a special purpose Reserve Bank account prototype
(a Payment Account) tailored to the risks and needs of institutions
focused on payments innovation. A Payment Account holder would be
expected to use its account for the express purpose of clearing and
settling the institution's payment activity. Payment Accounts would be
designed to pose limited risk to the Federal Reserve Banks (Reserve
Banks) and the overall payment system, and Reserve Banks would
generally conduct a streamlined review of requests for these accounts.
Any institution that is legally eligible for Federal Reserve accounts
or services (accounts and services) under the Federal Reserve Act would
be eligible to request a Payment Account from a Reserve Bank. The
Payment Account protype does not seek to expand or otherwise change
legal eligibility for access to accounts and services.

DATES: Comments must be received on or before February 6, 2026.

ADDRESSES: You may submit comments, identified by Docket No. OP-1877 by
any of the following methods:
Agency Website: https://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/proposals/. Follow the instructions for submitting comments, including
attachments. Preferred Method.
Mail: Benjamin W. McDonough, Deputy Secretary, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th Street and Constitution
Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20551.
Hand Delivery/Courier: Same as mailing address.
Other Means: [email protected]. You must include the
docket number in the subject line of the message.
Comments received are subject to public disclosure. In general,
comments received will be made available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/proposals/ without change and will
not be modified to remove personal or business information including
confidential, contact, or other identifying information. Comments
should not include any information such as confidential information
that would be not appropriate for public disclosure. Public comments
may also be viewed electronically or in person in Room M-4365A, 2001 C
St. NW, Washington, DC 20551, between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. during Federal
business weekdays.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jason Hinkle, Associate Director,
Zineb York, Manager, or Maggie Bota, Senior Financial Institution
Policy Analyst, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment
Systems; Matthew Malloy, Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, or
Corinne Milliken Van Ness, Senior Counsel, Legal Division, Board of the
Federal Reserve System: (202) 452-3000. For users of text telephone
systems (TTY) or any TTY-based Telecommunications Relay Services,
please call 711 from any telephone, anywhere in the United States.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Background

The payments landscape continues to evolve rapidly as technological
progress,

[[Page 60097]]

statutory developments, and other factors drive the introduction of
innovative approaches to banking functions. These innovations
necessitate adaptation throughout the financial sector, including the
institutions and infrastructure that support a safe and efficient
payment system.
On August 15, 2022, after a public comment process, the Board
adopted guidelines (Account Access Guidelines or Guidelines) for
Reserve Banks to utilize in evaluating requests for access to accounts
and services (access requests). The Guidelines establish a transparent,
risk-based, and consistent set of factors for Reserve Banks to use in
reviewing access requests from legally-eligible
institutions.1 2 3 The Guidelines incorporate a tiering
framework under which access requests from certain types of entities
(e.g., non-federally insured institutions) are subject to greater due
diligence and scrutiny than access requests from other types of
entities (e.g., federally-insured institutions).


\1\ 87 FR 51099 (Aug. 19, 2022).
\2\ Information on the Federal Reserve Banks' financial
services, including a list of such services, can be found at https://www.frbservices.org.
\3\ The Guidelines do not apply to accounts provided under
fiscal agency authority or to accounts authorized pursuant to the
Board's Regulation N (12 CFR part 214), joint account requests, or
account requests from designated financial market utilities, since
existing rules or policies already set out the considerations
involved in granting these types of accounts.


Over the last three years, the business models of institutions
submitting access requests have continued to evolve. For example,
several institutions have explained that they are interested in access
to accounts and services in order to reduce costs to their customers
while increasing payment processing speed, often through new
technologies. Some of these institutions have requested either a state
or federal banking charter and a few have initiated requests for
Reserve Bank accounts and services.
Over the same period, many eligible uninsured institutions have
requested or expressed interest in requesting a master account and have
expressed concern about the length of time that Reserve Banks take to
review their access requests and the likelihood of denial. Institutions
focused primarily on payment activities may only desire access to a
subset of Federal Reserve services through a Reserve Bank account.
While recognizing that decisions on access requests are made at the
discretion of the individual Reserve Banks, the Board is exploring
whether a tailored, special purpose Payment Account could meet these
institutions' needs while mitigating material risks identified in the
Guidelines.

II. Payment Account Prototype

The Board is requesting feedback on a Payment Account prototype. In
designing the Payment Account prototype, the Board has considered the
risks identified in the Guidelines (i.e., risks to the Reserve Banks,
to the overall payment system, to financial stability, to the overall
economy as a result of illicit activities, and to the implementation of
monetary policy). In addition, the Board considered features that could
limit Payment Accounts' impact on the Federal Reserve's balance sheet.
As explained further below, Payment Accounts would be subject to a
common set of risk-mitigating features. For example, to reduce credit
risk to the Reserve Banks, a Payment Account holder would only have
access to Federal Reserve payment services that have automated controls
to prevent the accountholder from incurring an overdraft. In addition,
a Payment Account holder would not be eligible for discount window
access. The Reserve Banks would retain their discretion to impose
additional restrictions and risk controls on a Payment Account on a
case-by-case basis.
A Payment Account would be separate and distinct from a full-
service Reserve Bank master account (Master Account).\4\ If the Federal
Reserve decides that the Reserve Banks will offer a Payment Account,
the Board would propose necessary changes to existing guidance and
regulations, including the Guidelines and Regulation D.


\4\ Some of the Payment Account features and risk controls could
be the same as utilized for a Master Account and are included in
this document for completeness.


III. Payment Account Term Sheet

A. Account Description

a. A Payment Account would be a special purpose account with a
Reserve Bank that holds limited overnight balances of a legally-
eligible institution for the express purpose of clearing and settling
the institution's payments.\5\ The Reserve Bank would permit a Payment
Account holder to maintain only a limited balance in the account at the
close of business; these end-of-day balances would be intended only to
provide liquidity for payment activity at the beginning of the next
business day. A Payment Account would be a separate and distinct type
of account from a Reserve Bank master account (a Master Account), which
generally does not have a limit imposed on overnight
balances.6 7 The Board would explore reporting the balances
maintained in Payment Accounts separate from balances maintained in
Master Accounts on the Reserve Banks' financial reporting. The Reserve
Banks would retain their discretion to impose additional restrictions
and risk controls on a Payment Account on a case-by-case basis.


\5\ A Payment Account would be technology-agnostic and would not
be designed to promote any particular payment product or service.
\6\ As with existing Master Accounts, overnight overdrafts would
not be permitted in Payment Accounts.
\7\ A Payment Account would be a separate and distinct type of
account from a Reserve Bank Joint Account.


B. Eligibility