[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 236 (Thursday, December 11, 2025)]
[Proposed Rules]
[Pages 57418-57436]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]
[FR Doc No: 2025-22519]



ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

40 CFR Part 180

[EPA-HQ-OPP-2025-0266; FRL-12991-01-OCSPP]
RIN 2070-ZA16

Pesticide Tolerances; Implementing Registration Review Decisions
for Certain Pesticides; Atrazine, et al.

AGENCY: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

ACTION: Proposed rule.



SUMMARY: The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA or Agency) is
proposing to implement several tolerance actions under the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) that the Agency determined were
necessary or appropriate during the registration review conducted under
the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). During
registration review, EPA reviews all aspects of a pesticide case,
including existing tolerances, to ensure that the pesticide continues
to meet the standard for registration under FIFRA. The pesticide
tolerances and active ingredients addressed in this rulemaking are
identified and discussed in detail in Unit III. of this document.

DATES: Comments must be received on or before February 9, 2026.

ADDRESSES: Submit your comments, identified by docket identification
(ID) number EPA-HQ-OPP-2025-0266, through https://www.regulations.gov.
Follow the online instructions for submitting comments. Do not submit
electronically any information you consider to be Confidential Business
Information (CBI) or other information whose disclosure is restricted
by statute. Additional instructions on commenting or visiting the
docket, along with more information about dockets generally, is
available at https://www.epa.gov/dockets.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Alex McKee, Pesticide Re-Evaluation
Division (7508M), Office of Pesticide Programs, Environmental
Protection Agency, 1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20460-
0001; telephone number: (202) 566-1939; email address:
[email protected].

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Executive Summary

A. Does this action apply to me?

You may be potentially affected by this action if you are an
agricultural producer, food manufacturer, or pesticide manufacturer.
The following list of North American Industrial Classification System
(NAICS) codes is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather provides a
guide to help readers determine whether this document might apply to
them:
Crop production (NAICS code 111).
Animal production (NAICS code 112).
Food manufacturing (NAICS code 311).
Pesticide manufacturing (NAICS code 32532).
If you have any questions regarding the applicability of this
proposed action to a particular entity, consult the person listed under
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT.

B. What action is the Agency taking?

EPA is proposing several tolerance actions that the Agency
previously determined were necessary or appropriate during registration
review of the pesticide active ingredients identified in Unit III. The
tolerance actions for each pesticide active ingredient are described in
Unit III. and may include but are not limited to the following types of
actions:
Revising tolerance expressions;
Modifying commodity definitions;
Updating crop groupings;
Removing expired tolerances;
Revoking tolerances that are no longer needed; and
Harmonizing tolerances with the Codex Alimentarius
Commission (Codex) Maximum Residue Levels (MRLs).
Although it may not have been identified in the registration review
of a particular pesticide, this proposed rule reflects the Agency's
2019 adoption of the Organization of Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) Rounding Class Practice. More information on the
OECD Rounding Class Practice can be found at https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/mrl-calculator-users-guide-and-white-paper_9789264221567-en.html. Where applicable, these adjustments are proposed for specific
pesticides as indicated in Unit III.

[[Page 57419]]

C. What is EPA's authority for taking this action?

Section 408(e) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA),
21 U.S.C. 346a(e), authorizes EPA to establish, modify, or revoke
tolerances or exemptions from the requirement of a tolerance on its own
initiative.
Under FIFRA section 3(g), 7 U.S.C. 136a(g), EPA is required to
periodically review all registered pesticides and determine if those
pesticides continue to meet the standard for registration under FIFRA.
As part of the registration review of a pesticide, EPA also evaluates
the existing tolerances and any tolerance changes identified as
necessary or appropriate during registration review of a pesticide are
summarized in the registration review decision documents for each
pesticide active ingredient or registration review case (e.g., in the
Proposed Interim Decision (PID), Proposed Final Decision (PFD), Interim
Decision (ID) and Final Decision (FD)). These documents can be found in
the public docket opened for each pesticide undergoing registration
review. Additional information about pesticide registration review is
available at https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-reevaluation.
Prior to issuing the final regulation, FFDCA section 408(e)(2)
requires EPA to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking for a 60-day
public comment period, unless the Administrator for good cause finds
that it would be in the public interest to have a shorter period and
states the reasons in the proposed rulemaking.

D. What should I consider as I prepare my comments for EPA?

1. Submitting CBI. Do not submit CBI to EPA through email or
https://www.regulations.gov. If you wish to include CBI in your
comment, please follow the applicable instructions at https://www.epa.gov/dockets/commenting-epa-dockets#rules and clearly mark the
information that you claim to be CBI. Information so marked will not be
disclosed except in accordance with procedures set forth in 40 CFR part
2.
2. Tips for preparing your comments. When preparing and submitting
your comments, see the commenting tips at https://www.epa.gov/dockets/commenting-epa-dockets.

E. What can I do if I want the Agency to maintain a tolerance that the
Agency proposes to revoke?

This proposed rule provides a 60-day public comment period that
allows any person to state an interest in retaining a tolerance
proposed for revocation. If EPA receives such a comment within the 60-
day period, EPA will not proceed to revoke the tolerance immediately.
However, EPA will take steps to ensure the submission of any needed
supporting data and will issue an order in the Federal Register under
FFDCA section 408(f), if needed. If the data are not submitted as
required in the order, EPA will take appropriate action under FFDCA.
After considering comments that are received in response to this
proposed rule, EPA will issue a final rule. At the time of the final
rule, you may file an objection or request a hearing on the action
taken in the final rule. If you fail to file an objection to the final
rule within the time period specified in the final rule, you will have
waived the right to raise any issues resolved in the final rule. After
the filing deadline specified in the final rule, issues resolved in the
final rule cannot be raised again in any subsequent proceedings.

II. Background

A. What is a tolerance?

A ``tolerance'' represents the maximum level for residues of a
pesticide chemical legally allowed in or on food, which includes raw
agricultural commodities and processed foods and feed for animals.
Under the FFDCA, residues of a pesticide chemical that are not covered
by a tolerance or exemption from the requirement of a tolerance are
considered unsafe. See 21 U.S.C. 346a(a)(1). Foods containing unsafe
residues are deemed adulterated and may not be distributed in
interstate commerce. See 21 U.S.C. 331(a) and 342(a)(2)(B).
Consequently, for a food-use pesticide (i.e., a pesticide use that is
likely to result in residues in or on food) to be sold and distributed
in the United States, the pesticide must not only have appropriate
tolerances or exemptions under the FFDCA, but also must be registered
under FIFRA. Food-use pesticides not registered in the United States
must have tolerances or exemptions in order for commodities treated
with those pesticides to be imported into the United States. For
additional information about tolerances, go to https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-tolerances/about-pesticide-tolerances.

B. Why does EPA consider international residue limits?

When establishing a tolerance for residues of a pesticide, EPA must
determine whether Codex has established a MRL for that pesticide. See
21 U.S.C. 346a(b)(4). Additionally, as part the registration review of
a pesticide (see Unit II.C.), EPA determines whether Codex or other
international MRLs exist for commodities and chemicals for which U.S.
tolerances have been established. Where appropriate, EPA's intention is
to harmonize U.S. tolerances with those international MRLs to
facilitate trade. EPA's effort to harmonize with international MRLs is
summarized in the tolerance reassessment section of the individual
Human Health Draft Risk Assessments that support the pesticide
registration review.

C. What is registration review?