[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 244 (Tuesday, December 23, 2025)]
[Proposed Rules]
[Pages 60432-60518]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]
[FR Doc No: 2025-23693]

[[Page 60431]]

Vol. 90

Tuesday,

No. 244

December 23, 2025

Part IV

Department of the Treasury



Internal Revenue Service



26 CFR Part 54

Department of Labor



Employee Benefits Security Administration



29 CFR Part 2590

Department of Health and Human Services



45 CFR Part 147

Transparency in Coverage; Proposed Rule

??Federal Register / Vol. 90 , No. 244 / Tuesday, December 23, 2025 /
Proposed Rules??

[[Page 60432]]



DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Internal Revenue Service

26 CFR Part 54

[REG-107111-25]
RIN 1545-BQ55

DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

Employee Benefits Security Administration

29 CFR Part 2590

RIN 1210-AC30

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

45 CFR Part 147

[CMS-9882-P]
RIN 0938-AV64

Transparency in Coverage

AGENCY: Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury; Employee
Benefits Security Administration, Department of Labor; Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human Services.

ACTION: Proposed rule.



SUMMARY: These proposed rules set forth proposed requirements that
would amend the regulations under the Public Health Service Act, the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, and the Internal
Revenue Code regarding price transparency reporting requirements for
non-grandfathered group health plans and health insurance issuers
offering non-grandfathered group and individual health insurance
coverage. Specifically, these proposed rules would improve the
standardization, accuracy, and accessibility of public pricing
disclosures in line with the goals of the Executive Order 14221. With
respect to the in-network rate and out-of-network allowed amount
machine-readable files, these proposed rules would achieve these goals
by adding new contextual files and additional data elements like
product type, network name, and enrollment counts; changing the
reporting level for aggregation of data; removing in-network rates for
unlikely provider-to-service mappings; increasing the reporting period
and lowering the claims threshold for out-of-network historical data;
and reducing the reporting cadence. These proposed rules would also
improve the findability of all of the publicly disclosed machine-
readable files required under the Transparency in Coverage rules,
including the prescription drug file, by requiring a text file and
footer with website URLs and contact information for the files. These
proposed rules would also require pricing information that is made
available through an online consumer tool and paper (upon request), to
also be made available by phone, and establish that the satisfaction of
such requirement also satisfies the requirements of section 114 of the
No Surprises Act (including for grandfathered group health plans and
health insurance issuers offering grandfathered group and individual
health insurance coverage that are not otherwise subject to these
proposed rules).

DATES: To be assured consideration, comments must be received at one of
the addresses provided below by February 23, 2026.

ADDRESSES: Written comments may be submitted to the addresses specified
below. Any comment that is submitted will be shared among the
Department of the Treasury, the Department of Labor, the Department of
Health and Human Services (the Departments), and the Office of
Personnel Management. Please do not submit duplicates.
Comments will be made available to the public. Warning: Do not
include any personally identifiable information (such as name, address,
or other contact information) or confidential business information that
you do not want publicly disclosed. Comments are posted on the internet
exactly as received and can be retrieved by most internet search
engines. No deletions, modifications, or redactions will be made to the
comments received, as they are public records. Comments may be
submitted anonymously.
In commenting, please refer to file code CMS-9882-P. Because of
staff and resource limitations, the Departments cannot accept comments
by facsimile (FAX) transmission.
Comments, including mass comment submissions, must be submitted in
one of the following three ways (please choose only one of the ways
listed):
1. Electronically. You may submit electronic comments on this
regulation to http://www.regulations.gov. Follow the ``Submit a
comment'' instructions.
2. By regular mail. You may mail written comments to the following
address ONLY: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of
Health and Human Services, Attention: CMS-9882-P, P.O. Box 8016,
Baltimore, MD 21244-8016.
Please allow sufficient time for mailed comments to be received
before the close of the comment period.
3. By express or overnight mail. You may send written comments to
the following address ONLY: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services,
Department of Health and Human Services, Attention: CMS-9882-P, Mail
Stop C4-26-05, 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21244-1850.
For information on viewing public comments, see the beginning of
the SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION section.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Kendra May or Jeremy Rotner, Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services, (301) 492-4293.
Elizabeth Schumacher or Sharon Aguirre, Employee Benefits Security
Administration, (202) 693-8335.
Alexander Krupnick, Internal Revenue Service, Department of the
Treasury, (202) 317-5500.
Individuals interested in obtaining information from the Department
of Labor (DOL) concerning employment-based health coverage laws may
call the Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) Toll-Free
Hotline at 1-866-444-EBSA (3272) or visit the DOL's website
(www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa). In addition, information from the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) on private health
insurance coverage and coverage provided by non-Federal governmental
group health plans can be found on the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS) website (http://www.cms.gov/marketplace), information on
health care reform can be found at http://www.healthcare.gov, and
information on surprise medical bills can be found at http://www.cms.gov/nosurprises.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Inspection of Public Comments: All comments received before the
close of the comment period are available for viewing by the public,
including any personally identifiable or confidential business
information that is included in a comment. The Departments post all
comments received before the close of the comment period on the
following website as soon as possible after they have been received:
http://www.regulations.gov. Follow the search instructions on that
website to view public comments. The Departments will not post on
Regulations.gov public comments that make threats to individuals or
institutions or suggest that the commenter will take actions to harm an
individual. The Departments continue to encourage individuals not to
submit duplicative comments. The

[[Page 60433]]

Departments will post acceptable comments from multiple unique
commenters even if the content is identical or nearly identical to
other comments. The Departments encourage commenters to include
supporting facts, research, and evidence in their comments. When doing
so, commenters are encouraged to provide citations to the materials
referenced, including active hyperlinks. Likewise, commenters who
reference materials that have not been published are encouraged to
upload relevant data collection instruments, data sets, and detailed
findings as a part of their comment. Providing such citations and
documentation will assist the Departments in analyzing the comments.
Plain Language Summary: In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(4), a
plain language summary of this rule may be found at https://www.regulations.gov/.

I. Executive Summary

A. Purpose

The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services (HHS), and the
Treasury (collectively, the Departments) issued proposed requirements
in the 2019 Transparency in Coverage proposed rules (2019 proposed
rules) \1\ and finalized the rules in 2020 (the 2020 final rules).\2\
The rules aimed to provide consumers with price and benefit information
that would enable them to better evaluate health care options and make
cost-conscious decisions; reduce surprises in consumers' out-of-pocket
costs for health care services; create a competitive dynamic that would
begin to narrow price differences for the same services in the same
health care markets; foster innovation by providing industry the
information necessary to support informed, price-conscious consumers in
the health care market; and, over time, potentially lower overall
health care costs.\3\


\1\ 84 FR 65464 (November 27, 2019).
\2\ 85 FR 72158 (November 12, 2020).
\3\ 85 FR 72158, 72160 (November 12, 2020).
