Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov

A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A lock
(

)
or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Search

Menu

Trastornos neurológicos en español

Search NINDS

Search NINDS

Main navigation

Health Information

Toggle Health Information Dropdown

Disorders

Clinical Trials and Studies

Patient & Caregiver Education

Public Education

Stroke

Funding

Toggle Funding Dropdown

Find Funding Opportunities

About Funding

Preparing Your Application

After You Submit

Determining Your Funding Likelihood

Manage Your Award

NINDS Small Business Program

Training & Career Development

Current Research

Toggle Current Research Dropdown

Focus on Disorders

Focus on Tools & Topics

Research Funded by NINDS

Research at NINDS

Scientific Resources

Trans-Agency Activities

News & Events

Toggle News & Events Dropdown

Events

News

Director's Messages

Publications

Toggle Publications Dropdown

Publications Help

About NINDS

Toggle About NINDS Dropdown

Who We Are

What We Do

Job Opportunities

75th Anniversary

Home

Health Information

SHARE:

Parkinson's Disease

On this page

What is Parkinson’s disease?

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a disorder of the nervous system that affects movement and gets worse over time. It causes nerve cells in parts of the brain to weaken, become damaged, and die. This can lead to symptoms that include:

Problems with movement and balance

Uncontrollable shaking of the hands or fingers (tremors)

Stiffness

As symptoms get worse, people with PD may have difficulty walking, talking, or completing everyday tasks.

PD and the brain

Most PD symptoms happen when brain cells weaken, become damaged, and die in a brain area called the substantia nigra. The neurons in this area produce dopamine. Dopamine is a chemical messenger that sends signals in the brain to produce smooth, purposeful movements. Research shows that by the time PD symptoms appear, most people have lost 60 to 80% or more of the dopamine-producing cells in the substantia nigra.

People with PD also have damage to brain cells that make norepinephrine. This is the main chemical messenger that’s involved in things the body does on its own, like keeping the heart beating and blood pressure steady. The loss of norepinephrine in people with PD is also thought to explain some symptoms that aren’t related to movement, such as being tired and blood pressure changes.

Damaged brain cells in most people with PD have Lewy bodies, abnormal clumps of a protein called alpha-synuclein. Researchers don’t yet know why Lewy bodies form or how they affect PD.

Learn more about how the brain works.

Symptoms of PD

PD affects people in different ways, including when symptoms appear and how fast they get worse. Although PD symptoms often begin on one side of the body, usually both sides are affected. Symptoms are often less severe on one side than they are on the other. Four common symptoms of PD are:

Tremors (shaking): Often begins in a person’s hand, although sometimes the person’s foot or jaw can also be affected first. PD tremors have a rhythmic back-and-forth motion. Often, a tremor will cause a person to rub their thumb and forefinger together, which may look like “pill rolling.” It’s most obvious when the hand is at rest or when a person is under stress. This tremor usually disappears during sleep and may improve when a person moves on purpose. Some people with PD may never develop a tremor.

Rigidity (muscle tightening): This symptom affects most people with PD. Muscles stay tense and tight, causing achiness or stiffness and may cause trouble with movement. There are two types of rigidity that can occur in PD. One type, called “lead pipe” rigidity, feels like steady resistance when someone else tries to move a person’s arm. The other type, called “cogwheel” rigidity, feels like short, jerky movements if someone else tries to move a person’s arm.

Bradykinesia: The body moves more slowly, even with simple everyday actions that usually happen automatically. Daily activities—such as washing or dressing—that the person could once perform quickly and easily may take much longer. A person with PD may show fewer facial expressions (known as "masked face").

Postural instability: Balance problems and changes in posture that can increase the risk of falls.

People with PD often develop a parkinsonian gait. This includes a tendency to stoop forward with less natural swinging in one or both arms and they may take small, shuffling steps. Some people with PD may have trouble trying to move, which is called start hesitation. They may have trouble getting their legs to take a step and may look like they are freezing in place. When walking, each step may get faster and faster and a person may have a hard time stopping or slowing down. This is called festination.

People with PD may have other symptoms, such as:

Mental and emotional health problems

These can include depression or anxiety and may happen during the early stage of PD, even before the start of movement problems.

Difficulty with swallowing and chewing

Problems with swallowing and chewing may happen in later stages of PD. Food and saliva may collect in the mouth and back of the throat, which can cause choking or drooling. It can be difficult for people in the later stages of PD to eat properly and get enough nutrients from food.

Speech changes

People with PD may have speech problems. It may seem like they are speaking quietly or in a flat voice without much change in tone. Some people may hesitate before speaking. They may also slur or speak too fast.

Urinary and digestive problems

People with PD may feel the need to go to the bathroom a lot, including at night, or have difficulty emptying their bladder. Digestive problems are also common in PD and often develop over time. Changes in the nerves that control the gut can affect swallowing and digestion, leading to symptoms like nausea and constipation—and in some cases, more serious complications.

Skin problems

People with PD may have oily skin, especially on the forehead and at the sides of the nose. The scalp may also become oily, which can cause dandruff. In other cases, a person with PD may have very dry skin or sweat a lot.

Sleep problems

Common sleep problems in PD include difficulty staying asleep, tossing and turning, and nightmares or very emotional dreams. People may also feel drowsy or suddenly fall asleep during the day. Some people with PD act out their dreams (which is called REM sleep behavior disorder). People with these symptoms have changes in thinking and behavior that cause the condition to get worse quickly.

Dementia or other cognitive problems

Some people with PD develop problems thinking and remembering things. These types of problems can get worse over time, and some people may develop Parkinson's disease dementia. PD can also affect a person’s ability to judge how deep or how far away things are. They may also have trouble paying attention, speaking, and figuring things out.

Orthostatic hypotension

This happens when a person’s blood pressure drops very quickly when they stand up after sitting or lying down. This symptom may cause dizziness and lightheadedness. In extreme cases, a person may lose balance or faint.

Muscle cramps and dystonia

Muscle stiffness and the inability to move normally in people with PD often causes muscle cramps, especially in the legs and toes. PD can also lead to dystonia—when muscles tighten for a long time, causing the body to twist or hold awkward positions.

Pain

People with PD may have aches and pains in their muscles and joints because of muscle tightening and unusual body positions that happen with the disorder.

Fatigue and loss of energy

Many people with PD are very tired, especially late in the day. This fatigue can be due to depression or sleep problems, but it can also be related to muscle problems—such as difficulty with moving, tremors, or stiffness. Some medications used to treat PD may also cause tiredness.

Sexual problems

PD can affect sexual function because it changes how the brain and nerves control the body. PD-related depression or use of certain medicines may also lower sex drive.

PD is the most common form of parkinsonism, a group of disorders with symptoms like Parkinson's disease. Many disorders can cause symptoms similar to those of PD, including:

Multiple system atrophy

Lewy body dementia

Progressive supranuclear palsy

Corticobasal degeneration

These disorders are sometimes referred to as “atypical Parkinsonisms” or “Parkinson's-plus syndrome” because they have other symptoms in addition to PD symptoms. They often don’t get better with the medicine levodopa.

In very rare cases, parkinsonian symptoms may happen in people younger than 20. This condition, juvenile parkinsonism, often starts with muscle tightening and slow movement. These symptoms often improve with the medicine levodopa.

Who is more likely to get Parkinson’s disease?

In most people with PD, the cause is unknown. Some cases of PD are inherited (passed down in families) and can be traced to specific genetic variations (mutations). But researchers think risk for PD comes from both genes and environmental factors. The term “exposome” refers to all environmental and lifestyle exposures across a person’s lifetime.

Non-genetic risk factors linked to PD

While it’s difficult to definitively predict who will develop PD, several factors are associated with increased risk. These include:

Age: The average age for PD to start is in a person’s early to mid-60s, and the chances are higher as people get older. A small percent of people with PD have “early-onset” Parkinson’s disease, which begins before 50.