Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov

A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A lock
(

)
or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Search

Menu

Trastornos neurológicos en español

Search NINDS

Search NINDS

Main navigation

Health Information

Toggle Health Information Dropdown

Disorders

Clinical Trials and Studies

Patient & Caregiver Education

Public Education

Stroke

Funding

Toggle Funding Dropdown

Find Funding Opportunities

About Funding

Preparing Your Application

After You Submit

Determining Your Funding Likelihood

Manage Your Award

NINDS Small Business Program

Training & Career Development

Current Research

Toggle Current Research Dropdown

Focus on Disorders

Focus on Tools & Topics

Research Funded by NINDS

Research at NINDS

Scientific Resources

Trans-Agency Activities

News & Events

Toggle News & Events Dropdown

Events

News

Director's Messages

Publications

Toggle Publications Dropdown

Publications Help

About NINDS

Toggle About NINDS Dropdown

Who We Are

What We Do

Job Opportunities

75th Anniversary

Home

Health Information

SHARE:

Epilepsy and Seizures

Select your language

EnglishEspañol

On this page

What are epilepsy and seizures?

Epilepsy is a chronic brain disorder in which groups of nerve cells, or neurons, in the brain sometimes send the wrong signals and cause seizures. Neurons normally generate electrical and chemical signals that act on other neurons, organs, and muscles to produce human thoughts, feelings, and actions.

During a seizure, many neurons send signals at the same time, much faster than normal. This surge of excessive electrical activity may cause involuntary movements, sensations, emotions, and/or behaviors. The disturbance of normal nerve cell activity may cause a loss of awareness. Some people recover immediately after a seizure, while others may take minutes to hours to feel like themselves again. During this time, they may feel tired, sleepy, weak, or confused.

Epilepsy (sometimes referred to as a seizure disorder) can have many different causes and seizure types. Epilepsy varies in severity and impact from person to person and can be accompanied by a range of co-existing conditions. Epilepsy is sometimes called “the epilepsies” because of the diversity of types and causes. Some people may have convulsions (muscles contract repeatedly) and lose consciousness. Others may simply stop what they are doing, have a brief lapse of awareness, and stare into space for a short period. Some people have seizures very infrequently, while other people may experience hundreds of seizures each day.

While any seizure is cause for concern, having a seizure does not by itself mean a person has epilepsy. First seizures, febrile seizures, nonepileptic events, and eclampsia (a life-threatening condition that can occur during pregnancy) are examples of conditions involving seizures that may not be associated with epilepsy. Regardless of the type of seizure, it's important to inform your doctor when you have a seizure.

Who is more likely to have epilepsy and seizures?

Anyone can develop epilepsy. It affects both men and women of all races, ethnic backgrounds, and ages.

Epilepsy has many possible causes, but about half of people living with epilepsy do not know the cause. In some cases, epilepsy is clearly linked to genetic factors, developmental brain abnormalities, infection, traumatic brain injury (TBI), stroke, brain tumors, or other identifiable problems. Anything that disturbs the normal pattern of nerve cell activity—from illness to brain damage to brain development problems—can lead to seizures.

Epilepsy may develop because of problems in the brain’s wiring, an imbalance of nerve signaling in the brain (in which some cells are unusually active or stop other brain cells from sending messages), or some combination of these factors. Sometimes, when the brain tries to repair itself after a head injury, stroke, or other problem, it can unintentionally create nerve connection issues that lead to seizures.

The role of genes in epilepsy

Genetic changes may play a key role in the development of certain types of epilepsy. Many types affect multiple members of a family, pointing to an inherited gene or genes. In other cases, gene variations may occur spontaneously and contribute to the development of epilepsy in people with no family history of the disorder (called “de novo” mutations). Overall, researchers estimate that hundreds of genes could play a role.

Several types of epilepsy (called channelopathy-associated epilepsy) have been linked to variations in genes that provide instructions for ion channels, the "gates" that control the flow of ions (charged molecules) in and out of cells and help regulate neuronal signaling. Other genetic changes that may play a role in epilepsy include variations in genes that control how neurons move through the brain during development (neuronal migration) and genes that help break down carbohydrates in the brain.

Other genetic changes may not cause epilepsy but may influence the disorder in other ways, for example, some genes may affect a person's susceptibility to seizures and responsiveness to anti-seizure medications.

Conditions that can lead to epilepsy

Epilepsy may develop as a result of many types of conditions that disrupt normal brain activity, known as “co-occurring conditions”. Once these conditions are treated, individuals may no longer have seizures. However, whether the seizures stop varies based on the type of disorder, the brain region that is affected, and how much brain damage occurred prior to treatment. Examples of conditions that can lead to epilepsy include:

Brain tumors

Head trauma

Alcoholism or alcohol withdrawal

Alzheimer's disease

Strokes, heart attacks, and other conditions that deprive the brain of oxygen

Abnormal blood vessel formation (called arteriovenous malformations) or bleeding in the brain

Brain inflammation or swelling

Infections such as meningitis, HIV-related infections, and viral encephalitis

Cerebral palsy and other developmental disorders also may be associated with epilepsy. Epilepsy is often seen in people with other brain development disorders, for example, among individuals with autism spectrum disorder or intellectual disabilities.

What can trigger seizures?

Seizure triggers do not cause epilepsy but can provoke seizures in those who are susceptible. For those who are already diagnosed with epilepsy and taking medication, triggers can spark a seizure. Triggers include:

Stress

Drinking alcohol, or alcohol withdrawal

Dehydration or missing meals

Exposure to toxins or poisons, including lead, carbon monoxide, illicit drugs, and very large doses of prescription medications

Hormonal changes associated with the menstrual cycle

Sleep deprivation

Visual stimulation such as flashing lights or moving patterns

In surveys of people with epilepsy, stress is the most commonly reported seizure trigger.

Types of seizures

Seizures are divided into two broad categories: focal seizures and generalized seizures. There are many different types of seizures within each of these categories.

Focal seizures

Focal seizures come from just one part of the brain. About 60% of people with epilepsy have focal seizures. These seizures are frequently described by the area of the brain in which they originate. For example, many people are diagnosed with focal frontal lobe or medial temporal lobe seizures.

Symptoms of focal seizures

In some focal seizures, the person remains conscious during the seizure but may experience motor, sensory, or psychic feelings (for example, intense dejà vu or memories) or sensations. The person may experience sudden and unexplainable feelings of joy, anger, sadness, or nausea. He or she also may hear, smell, taste, see, or feel things that are not real and may have movements of just one part of the body, for example, just one hand.

In other focal seizures, the person has a change in consciousness, which can produce a dreamlike experience. The person may display unusual, repetitive behaviors such as blinks, twitches, mouth movements, or even walking in a circle. These repetitive movements are called automatisms. A person may perform more complicated actions, which may seem purposeful, involuntarily. Individuals may also continue activities they started before the seizure began, such as washing dishes in a repetitive, unproductive fashion. These seizures usually last no more than a minute or two.

Some people with focal seizures may experience auras—unusual sensations that warn of an impending seizure. An individual's symptoms, and how they progress, tend to be similar every time. Some people report experiencing a prodrome, a feeling that a seizure is imminent lasting hours or days.

Following focal seizures, a person may experience symptoms in areas controlled by the area of the brain where their seizure originated. This can help doctors locate the brain region where the seizure started. After a seizure, some people may experience a headache or pain in the muscles that contracted during the seizure.

The symptoms of focal seizures can be easily confused with other disorders. The strange behavior and sensations caused by focal seizures also can be mistaken for symptoms of narcolepsy, fainting, or even mental illness. Several tests and careful monitoring may be needed to make the distinction between epilepsy and these other disorders.

Generalized seizures