Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov

A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A lock (

A locked padlock

) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

https://www.nist.gov/pml/owm/si-units-length

Search NIST

Menu

Close

Publications

What We Do

All Topics

Advanced communications

Artificial intelligence

Bioscience

Buildings and construction

Chemistry

Cybersecurity and Privacy

Electronics

Energy

Environment

Fire

Forensic science

Health

Information technology

Infrastructure

Manufacturing

Materials

Mathematics and statistics

Metrology

Nanotechnology

Neutron research

Performance excellence

Physics

Public safety

Quantum information science

Resilience

Standards

Transportation

Labs & Major Programs

Assoc Director of Laboratory Programs

Laboratories

Communications Technology Laboratory

Engineering Laboratory

Information Technology Laboratory

Material Measurement Laboratory

Physical Measurement Laboratory

User Facilities

NIST Center for Neutron Research

CNST NanoFab

Research Test Beds

Research Projects

Tools & Instruments

Major Programs

Baldrige Performance Excellence Program

CHIPS for America Initiative

Manufacturing Extension Partnership (MEP)

Office of Advanced Manufacturing

Special Programs Office

Technology Partnerships Office

Services & Resources

Measurements and Standards

Calibration Services

Laboratory Accreditation (NVLAP)

Quality System

Standard Reference Materials (SRMs)

Standard Reference Instruments (SRIs)

Standards.gov

Time Services

Office of Weights and Measures

Software

Data

Chemistry WebBook

National Vulnerability Database

Physical Reference Data

Standard Reference Data (SRD)

Storefront

License & Patents

Computer Security Resource Center (CSRC)

NIST Research Library

News & Events

News

Events

Blogs

NIST In Focus

Feature Stories

Awards

Video Gallery

Image Gallery

Media Contacts

About NIST

About Us

Leadership

Organization Structure

Budget & Planning

Contact Us

Visit

Careers

Student programs

Work with NIST

History

NIST Digital Archives

NIST Museum

NIST and the Nobel

Educational Resources

Physical Measurement Laboratory

Office of Weights and Measures

Laboratory Homepage

Division Homepage

About OWM
Expand or Collapse

Background and History

Responsibilities and Authorities

Staff Directory
Expand or Collapse

Federal Staff

Associates and Interns

Organization Chart

Strategic Plan

Pages by Topic
Expand or Collapse

Gasoline Dispensers

Grain Analyzers

FAQs

OWM Products and Services
Expand or Collapse

Publications and Documentary Standards
Expand or Collapse

EPOs

Handbooks

Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIR)

Metric Publications

NCWM Annual Reports

OWM Technical Analysis

SP 2200 Legal Metrology Series

Special Publications (SP)

e-Learning Resources
Expand or Collapse

Recorded Webinars/Videos

Info Hours

EPOs

Training Classes and Events

Newsletter

Technical Articles

National Working Groups

Training Classes and Events

Programs/Groups
Expand or Collapse

International Legal Metrology
Expand or Collapse

Documentary Standards

Glossary of Acronyms

ILMP Organizational Primer

National Metrology Systems

OIML Resources

Laboratory Metrology
Expand or Collapse

Metrology Training

Proficiency Testing (PT)

Laboratory Recognition

Documentary Standards and Resources
Expand or Collapse

Calibration Procedures

GLPs

GMPs

Recognition

OJT and Mentoring

SOPs

Metric (SI)
Expand or Collapse

U.S. Metrication

SI Units

Understanding Metric

Everyday with Metric

Metric Kitchen

SI Education & Training

Unit Conversion

Metric Policy

National Legal Metrology
Expand or Collapse

Laws and Regulations Resources

Legal Devices Training Materials

Price Verification

Precious Metals Conversion

Packaging and Labeling

U.S. National Working Groups

U.S. Retail Pricing Laws and Regulations

Resources for Weights and Measures
Expand or Collapse

Weights and Measures in the News

State Weights and Measures Directors

State Metrology Laboratories

U.S. W&M and Metrologist Directory

National Council on Weights and Measures (NCWM)

National Type Evaluation Program (NTEP)

International Organization of Legal Metrology (OIML)

SI Units – Length

Share

Facebook

Linkedin

X.com

Email

Credit:

NIST

Resources for Students and Teachers | How do I get a metric ruler?  | When did the metric redefinition of the inch occur? | League of SI Superheroes – Meter Man

The meter (m) is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the speed of light in vacuum c to be 299,792,458 when expressed in the unit m s−1, where the second is defined in terms of ∆?Cs.

The meter was once defined by a physical artifact - two marks inscribed on a platinum-iridium bar, like these from the NIST Museum.

From the meter, several other units of measure are derived such as the:

unit of speed is the meter per second (m/s). The speed of light in vacuum is 299 792 458 meters per second.

unit of acceleration is the meter per second per second (m/s2).

unit of area is the square meter (m2).

unit of volume is the cubic meter (m3). The liter (1 cubic decimeter), although not an SI unit, is accepted for use with the SI and is commonly used when measuring fluid volume, but is also used when measuring gases and solids.

Return to Top of Page

Units of Length

10 millimeters (mm)=1 centimeter (cm)

10 centimeters=1 decimeter (dm)

10 centimeters=100 millimeters

10 decimeters=1 meter (m)

10 decimeters=1000 millimeters

10 meters=1 dekameter (dam)

10 dekameters=1 hectometer (hm)

10 dekameters=100 meters

10 hectometers=1 kilometer (km)

10 hectometers=1000 meters

Return to Top of Page

Resources for Students and Teachers

Teachers: Top 10 Tips for Teaching the Metric System. (NIST)

Credit:

©2020 U.S. Secretary of Commerce. All Rights Reserved.

Resources for K-2

Not sure how to tell that scientific minded person in your life how you feel? Maybe our Superhero Valentine's Day cards will do the trick.

Download these fun coloring pages for Meter Man and our SI Superheroes.

The Metric Meal (option 2) focuses exclusively on length measurements and uses a multidisciplinary approach to build measurement skills.

Practice measuring length with centimeters in the Squares and Rectangles activity (PBS). k-2

Calculate Focal Length (The Optical Society) – Use this hands-on activity to explore an important concept that’s used in STEAM tools like microscopes, telescopes, and cameras. K-

Credit:

©2020 U.S. Secretary of Commerce. All Rights Reserved.

Resources for Grade 3-5

League of SI Superheroes - Meter Man

This comic book-style video animation series has been developed to help middle school students learn about the 7 SI base measurement units.

SI Units Card Deck (SP 1297) - this activity offers a fun way to enhance understanding of the International System of Units. (NIST)

Metric Estimation Game (SP 1336) - this fun, hands-on activity helps participants become familiar with SI measurements by practicing estimation skills. During this activity, participants will become familiar with using the metric system (International System of Units, SI) measurements on common, everyday items.

Metric Ruler (SP 376) (NIST) - an educational tool designed to teach SI) length measurements. 3

What is a Nanometer? (IEEE) – In this activity, develop an understanding of how small a nanometer really is. During the lesson, students will measure common classroom objects and convert the results to nanometers. 3

Length Column Game (Quintessential Instructional Archive) – Become familiar with equivalent metric length measurements. Draw a line to connect between like measurements. Look carefully, because some items do not have a match! 3

The Wright Way: Innovation Through Engineering (NASA) - This educational poster includes metric activities associated with the Wright Brothers' flight experiments and include constructing and testing a sled kite, analyzing the resulting data, and assembling a metric cube. The student worksheet includes the learning objectives and academic standards (Pre-K to 12th grades), the sled kite template, worksheet and metric cube. 3

SI Area (NIST) – Explore resources to become familiar with units used to measure area, including the hectare.

SI Volume (NIST) – Explore resources to become familiar with units used to measure volume, including the liter.

Credit:

N. Hanacek/NIST

Resources for Grade 6-8

Metric Estimation Game (SP 1336) - this fun, hands-on activity helps participants become familiar with SI measurements by practicing estimation skills. During this activity, participants will become familiar with using the metric system (International System of Units, SI) measurements on common, everyday items.

SI Base Units Relationship Poster (SP 1247) (NIST) – a colorful poster illustrating the relationships of the International System of Units (SI) derived units with special names and symbols and the seven traditional base units.

SI Units Card Deck (SP 1297) (NIST) – this activity offers a fun way to enhance understanding of the International System of Units, including the defining constants, base units, derived units with special names, and prefixes.

Sea Floor Mapping (NOAA)- An educational resource on how scientists map the ocean floor using sonar and other technologies, with classroom materials included.

Mountain in the Sea Exploration: Big Fleas Have Little Fleas! (NOAA) Grades 7-8 Life Science Lesson Plan - PDF

Exploring the Inner Space of the Celebes Sea - Staying Up (NOAA) Grades 7-8 Life Science/Physical Science Lesson Plan - PDF