Skip to main content

Menu

Climate.gov
Science & information for a climate-smart nation

Main Menu

Main menu

News & Features

Home

All News & Features

Blogs

ENSO Blog

Polar Vortex Blog

Beyond the Data Blog

Climate And ...

Climate Case Studies

Climate Dashboard

Climate Q&A

Event Tracker

Climate Tech

Featured Images

Decision Makers Take 5

Videos

Decision Makers Toolbox

El Niño & La Niña Page

NOAA Greenhouse Gas

Features

News & Research Highlights

Understanding Climate

View News & Features section

Maps & Data

Home

All Maps & Data

Climate Dashboard

Climate Data Primer

Dataset Gallery

Tools & Interactives

Data Snapshots

View Maps & Data section

Teaching Climate

Home

Climate Dashboard

Teaching Climate

Teaching Energy

Toolbox for Climate & Energy

Partnership with CLEAN collection

View Teaching Climate section

Resilience Toolkit

About

About Us

What's New

FAQs

Sitemap

Facebook

BlueSky

Twitter

Instagram

YouTube

This website is an ARCHIVED version of NOAA Climate.gov as of June 25, 2025.
Content is not being updated or maintained, and some links may no longer work.
To access current NOAA climate information resources, please visit www.noaa.gov/climate

Facebook

BlueSky

Twitter

Instagram

YouTube

Search

Search

powered by webLyzard technology

Breadcrumb

Home

News & Features

Understanding Climate

El Niño and La Niña: Frequently asked questions

By Climate.gov Staff

Reviewed by Mike Halpert, Anthony Barnston, Michelle L'Heureux, AND Emily Becker

Published January 18, 2016

facebook

BlueSky

twitter

envelope

print

Highlights

El Niño and La Niña are the warm and cool phases of ENSO (pronounced “en-so”).

ENSO is the most influential natural climate pattern on Earth.

ENSO swings back and forth every few years.

El Niño and La Niña affect both the ocean and the atmosphere.

Periods of weaker- or stronger-than-average easterly trade winds initiate El Niño and La Niña.

By disrupting the atmospheric circulation in the planet's largest ocean basin, El Niño shifts the average location and strength of the mid-latitude jet sreams, producing "side effects" on weather around the globe.

In the United States, El Niño has its strongest impact during winter.

Related Content

What are El Niño and La Niña?

El Niño and La Niña are opposite phases of a natural climate pattern across the tropical Pacific Ocean that swings back and forth every 3-7 years on average. Together, they are called ENSO (pronounced “en-so”), which is short for El Niño-Southern Oscillation.

The ENSO pattern in the tropical Pacific can be in one of three states: El Niño, Neutral, or La Niña. El Niño (the warm phase) and La Niña (the cool phase) lead to significant differences from the average ocean temperatures, winds, surface pressure, and rainfall across parts of the tropical Pacific. Neutral indicates that conditions are near their long-term average.

Maps of sea surface temperature anomaly in the Pacific Ocean during a strong La Niña (top, December 1988) and El Niño (bottom, December 1997). Maps by NOAA Climate.gov, based on data provided by NOAA View. large versions La Niña | El Niño

What happens during El Niño and La Niña?

During El Niño, the surface winds across the entire tropical Pacific are weaker than usual. Ocean temperatures in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean are warmer than average, and rainfall is below average over Indonesia and above average over the central or eastern Pacific.

Rising air motion (which is linked to storms and rainfall) increases over the central or eastern Pacific, and surface pressure there tends to be lower than average.  Meanwhile, an increase in sinking air motion over Indonesia leads to higher surface pressure and dryness.

Generalized Walker Circulation (December-February) anomaly during El Niño events, overlaid on map of average sea surface temperature anomalies. Anomalous ocean warming in the central and eastern Pacific (orange) help to shift a rising branch of the Walker Circulation to east of 180°, while sinking branches shift to over the Maritime continent and northern South America. NOAA Climate.gov drawing by Fiona Martin.

During La Niña, it’s the opposite. The surface winds across the entire tropical Pacific are stronger than usual, and most of the tropical Pacific Ocean is cooler than average. Rainfall increases over Indonesia (where waters remain warm) and decreases over the central tropical Pacific (which is cool). Over Indonesia, there is more rising air motion and lower surface pressure. There is more sinking air motion over the cooler waters of the central and eastern Pacific.

Generalized Walker Circulation (December-February) anomaly during La Niña events, overlaid on map of average sea surface temperature anomalies. Anomalous ocean cooling (blue-green) in the central and eastern Pacific Ocean and warming over the western Pacific Ocean enhance the rising branch of the Walker circulation over the Maritime Continent and the sinking branch over the eastern Pacific Ocean. Enhanced rising motion is also observed over northern South America, while anomalous sinking motion is found over eastern Africa. NOAA Climate.gov drawing by Fiona Martin.

Between the warm phase (El Niño) and cool phase (La Niña), scientists describe conditions as “ENSO-neutral.” Neutral means that the temperatures, winds, convection (rising air), and rainfall across the tropical Pacific are near their long-term averages.

Generalized Walker Circulation (December-February) during ENSO-neutral conditions.  Convection associated with rising branches of the Walker Circulation is found over the Maritime continent, northern South America, and eastern Africa. NOAA Climate.gov drawing by Fiona Martin.

Is El Niño a kind of storm that will hit the U.S.?

No, El Niño isn’t a storm that will hit a specific area at a specific time. Instead, the warmer tropical Pacific waters cause changes to the global atmospheric circulation, resulting in a wide range of changes to global weather. Think of how a big construction project across town can change the flow of traffic near your house, with people being re-routed, side roads taking more traffic, and normal exits and on-ramps closed. Different neighborhoods will be affected most at different times of the day. You would feel the effects of the construction project through its changes to normal patterns, but you wouldn’t expect the construction project to "hit" your house.

Was that big storm we just had due to El Niño?

That isn't an answerable question. El Niño does increase the chances for a wet and stormy winter and early spring overall across the southern tier of the United States, but it's impossible to say that any single storm was solely caused by El Niño and wouldn't have happened otherwise.

Think of it this way: Suppose that in an average year, your state experiences 10 winter storms. During this El Niño winter, perhaps you get 13. It's impossible to say which 10 were your "normal" ones and which 3 were the "extra" ones.

However, for any specific storm, scientists can try to estimate if and how much El Niño contributed to making the event especially extreme, for example, by increasing the amount of water vapor available “in the background,” or by shifting the position or strength of the jet stream.

This sort of analysis is called an attribution study. It requires comprehensive observations—both current and historical—as well as highly detailed climate recreations of the weather patterns that gave rise to the storm. It may take scientists several months to conduct this kind of analysis.

How do El Niño and La Niña affect weather patterns?

El Niño and La Niña alternately warm and cool large areas of the tropical Pacific—the world’s largest ocean—which significantly influences where and how much it rains there. The primary location of moist, rising air (over the basin’s warmest water) is centered over the central or eastern Pacific during El Niño and over Indonesia and the western Pacific during La Niña.

This shift disrupts the atmospheric circulation patterns that connect the tropics with the middle latitudes, which in turn modifies the mid-latitude jet streams. By modifying the jet streams, ENSO can affect temperature and precipitation across the United States and other parts of the world. The influence on the U.S. is strongest during the winter (January-March), but it lingers into the early spring.

These maps illustrate the typical impacts of El Niño and La Niña on U.S. winter weather. Typical means "common," but not guaranteed because each event is unique. NOAA Climate.gov drawings, adapted from originals by the Climate Prediction Center.

During El Niño, the southern tier of Alaska and the U.S. Pacific Northwest tend to be warmer than average, whereas the U.S. southern tier of state—from California to the Carolinas—tends to be cooler and wetter than average.  During La Niña, these deviations from the average are approximately (but not exactly) reversed.

The influence of El Niño and La Niña in some parts of the United States and the rest of the world can be so strong that they increase the odds of “extreme weather events”—phenomena that rank in the highest or lowest 10% compared to historical observations.  (Click to view a historical perspective on El Niño impacts in the U.S.)

However, not all of these influences are negative. For example, because the northern tier of the U.S. tends to be warmer than average during El Niño winters, heating costs there may be appreciably reduced.

How does ENSO affect global average temperature?